
# Personal Information
Information can be controversial to define. Widespread agreement exists, though, about some properties and uses of information.

## Personal information systems

Extensive research over the past twenty years, some of
it by Tom Malone at MIT and Susan Dumais at Microsoft
Research, has explored how people organize personal
information.

One example that helps people understand the problem of
personal information is the knife analogy, described
below.

One important finding about personal information
management has been that people are prone to do one or
some combination of these two things: filing and piling.

After reviewing the following topics, conclude the
study of personal information systems by doing the
*share best practices* exercise.

## Knives in the home

Suppose you have just won a complete set of knives for
your home. Where should you put them? You could have a
single cabinet to store all knives, but it is more
likely that you will distribute the knives to different
rooms, placing them near where they will be used: steak
knives in a buffet in the dining room, cooking knives in
the kitchen, handyman knives in a garage workshop.

When you need a particular knife, it will be in the
context of a current task, such as preparing food,
setting a table, or cutting a length of rope for a
clothesline. In each room, there is some place where the 
tools appropriate to the tasks performed in that room 
are stored.

## Filing: using hierarchies to organize information

Filing refers to organizing items according to
categories or classifications or clusters.
(Researchers define these three words differently.)
If a filer looks for information, it is found in a
place where like information is found. That information 
may be in a nested structure containing more general 
information at the higher levels and more specific 
information at the lower levels.

For example, information relevant to your work as a
student may be kept in files on a usb drive in a folder 
called schoolwork. Within that folder may be a separate 
folder for each course, as well as a separate folder for 
administrative documents not related to any given 
course. There might be a folder for each term containing 
a schedule for that term, grades for that term, and 
more. On the other hand, you may divide such folders 
differently: into group work and individual work. Or you 
may organize according the types of files, with videos
in one folder, music in another, and text documents in 
another.

## Piling: using tags to organize information

Piling refers to dumping information where it is most 
convenient. The piler makes no effort to move 
information around. Instead, the piler usually uses tags 
of some kind to find information. The piler may create 
these tags or take advantage of existing tags.

For example, Mac users employ Spotlight, a local search 
engine to find files using (mostly) words in the files.  
Those words are automatically indexed by Spotlight into 
a tagging system, especially while the computer is 
otherwise idle. As another example, the IMDB has a file 
containing keywords for each movie recorded---if someone 
cares enough about that movie to type in keywords. You 
can search for a movie by entering any of these 
keywords.

What's problematic about such a system? One issue is 
that a given user does not necessarily know what 
keywords are available to describe a given concept. The 
IMDB tries to overcome this be presenting a display of 
all the keywords that appear in movies that share the 
keyword being searched. How else could you try to 
overcome this limitation?

Another limitation of tags is that words have different 
*senses* so that searches for words like net and rock 
return results that may not be of interest depending on 
whether the search is for tennis or the web or music or 
geology. How can you try to overcome this limitation?  
One way is to use context. For instance, your browser by 
default saves the most recent URL you visited as a 
*referrer* and makes it possible for the administrator 
of the next URL to identify it. If my referrer has the 
string *wimbledon* in it, am I more likely to be looking 
for tennis or the web?

A typical business use of tags can be found in Adwords, 
the main way Google earns revenue. An adword is a tag 
associated with an advertisement. A business can pay to 
be advertised when an adword appears in the Google 
search window.

## Exercise: share best practices

1. Form an ad hoc group of four (four is an ideal
   number---three or five if you must).

2. Share a google doc between the four group members and
the instructor.

3. Each member of the group writes three paragraphs
   describing your personal information process. The first
   paragraph describes what you do. The second paragraph
   describes what works well about it. The third
   paragraph describes what does not work well about it.

4. Discuss the resulting paragraphs

5. Write two paragraphs as a group describing 
strengths of individual members you all agree should be
carried forward and the weaknesses of individual members
you all agree you do not want to include in your
personal information management process. These two paragraphs should constitute a summary of what you all agree on. If you feel that a point of disagreement merits sharing with the rest of the class, you may optionally add that as an additional paragraph.

Some valuable readings can be found at the following
URLs. These were all obtained by googling the expression
*pilers-vs-filers* and appeared in the first three pages
of results. These are replicated in the resources folder on
MyCourses. The names are the MyCourses files, while
the links are the google result links.

[FilersVsPilersForbes](http://www.forbes.com/sites/bwoo/2013/02/20/are-you-a-filer-or-piler/)

[FilersVsPilersEconomist](http://www.economist.com/node/1489224)

[Jones2011](http://books.google.com/books?id=byN4SPUt6RgC&pg=PA212&lpg=PA212&dq=filers+vs+pilers&source=bl&ots=d_4Bm_sAaG&sig=78Fkf46OjWKAbNb56L3sUKQfULY&hl=en&sa=X&ei=M5PVUu-eNoLmoAS-kYII&ved=0CEkQ6AEwBDgU#v=onepage&q=filers vs pilers&f=false)

Note that each of these readings has a different form of
credibility, to be discussed in a later section of the
course. When you use a search engine to discover
information about a topic, you must be sensitive to
issues related to the search engine and to the
information sources linked. Here, I will just give a
brief blurb about each source.

Forbes was a US magazine for decades before it created
an online presence. It cultivates an image as a maverick
business publication, espousing values favoring
considerable social and economic freedom for
individuals, and a blunt style, connecting business
success to individuals rather than organizations.

The Economist is a conservative British weekly magazine.
A policy advisor to US President Clinton once told me
that The Economist is the most widely read publicly
available weekly publication among presidents and prime
ministers of nations worldwide.

The Google Books result is a page from a book
 called *Personal Information
Management*, edited by William P Jones and Jaime Teevan.
This book is a collection of chapters by scholars who
write about information systems. This book
introduces the mainstream academic thinking about
personal information management. It introduces what
scholars who do studies about personal information
management have concluded over the past thirty years of
study.

## Advice on PKM
[Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=17892731) has repeatedly visited the issue of *personal knowledge management* (PKM) with discussions of advice on how to accomplish it. It is instructive to read several of these discussions to see what changes and what remains the same over time. Many posts prescribe particular software packages for PKM. Others suggest practices the authors find useful, such as using the filesystem to organize artifacts. Alarmingly, some authors claim to have practiced their preferred method for as little as a few days! Consequently, it is harder to view these as prescriptions as much as they are viewpoints.

One major issue raised by many of these posters is the problem of link rot. Saving bookmarks to websites may be less effective than copying the entire website.
Bloat can be a severe problem as one poster claims to have a OneNote file of over 8GB that can no longer be synchronized and can not be easily exported. The OneNote user also touches on the problem that proprietary formats bring lock-in. The problem of lock-in may not be apparent until a large investment of time and energy has been made that would be expensive to replicate.
One credible suggestion is to submit bookmarks to public archive sites to overcome link rot and take advantage of distributed storage as well as to avoid proprietary formats and participate in creating a public good.
Distributing storage to the web may reduce bloat but also reduces privacy and increases reliance on an uninterrupted network connection.

